README.md, before:

# cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira

Part of the [commitizen](https://github.com/commitizen/cz-cli) family. Prompts for [conventional changelog](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/conventional-changelog) standard and also prompts for a mandatory JIRA issue.

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira.svg?style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira.svg?style=flat-square)](http://npm-stat.com/charts.html?package=@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira&from=2015-08-01)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira.svg?style=flat-square)](https://travis-ci.org/digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira)

## Features

- Works seamlessly with semantic-release 🚀
- Works seamlessly with Jira smart commits
- Automatically detects the Jira issue from the branch name

## Quickstart

### Installation

```bash
npm install commitizen @digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira
```

and then add the following to package.json:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "commit": "git-cz"
  },
  "config": {
    "commitizen": {
      "path": "./node_modules/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira"
    }
  }
}
```

### Usage

![Gif of terminal when using cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira/master/images/demo.gif)

## Configuration

Like commitizen, you can specify the configuration of cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira through the package.json's `config.commitizen` key, or with environment variables.

| Environment variable | package.json   | Default           | Description                                                                                                                                                           |
| -------------------- | -------------- | ----------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CZ_JIRA_MODE         | jiraMode       | true              | If this is set to true, CZ will ask for a Jira issue and put it in the commit head. If set to false CZ will ask for the issue in the end, and can be used for GitHub. |
| CZ_MAX_HEADER_WIDTH  | maxHeaderWidth | 72                | This limits how long a commit message head can be.                                                                                                                    |
| CZ_MIN_HEADER_WIDTH  | minHeaderWidth | 2                 | This limits how short a commit message can be.                                                                                                                        |
| CZ_MAX_LINE_WIDTH    | maxLineWidth   | 100               | Commit message bodies are automatically wrapped. This decides how long the lines will be.                                                                             |
| CZ_SKIP_SCOPE        | skipScope      | true              | If scope should be used in commit messages.                                                                                                                           |
|                      | scopes         | undefined         | A list (JS Array) of scopes that will be available for selection. Note that adding this will change the scope field from Inquirer 'input' to 'list'.                  |
| CZ_TYPE              | defaultType    | undefined         | The default type.                                                                                                                                                     |
| CZ_SCOPE             | defaultScope   | undefined         | The default scope.                                                                                                                                                    |
| CZ_SUBJECT           | defaultSubject | undefined         | A default subject.                                                                                                                                                    |
| CZ_BODY              | defaultBody    | undefined         | A default body.                                                                                                                                                       |
| CZ_ISSUES            | defaultIssues  | undefined         | A default issue.                                                                                                                                                      |
| CZ_JIRA_OPTIONAL     | jiraOptional   | false             | If this is set to true, you can leave the JIRA field blank.                                                                                                           |
| CZ_JIRA_PREFIX       | jiraPrefix     | "DAZ"             | If this is set it will be will be displayed as the default JIRA ticket prefix                                                                                         |
| CZ_JIRA_LOCATION     | jiraLocation   | "pre-description" | Changes position of JIRA ID. Options: `pre-type`, `pre-description`, `post-description`                                                                               |
| CZ_JIRA_PREPEND      | jiraPrepend    | ""                | Prepends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `[DAZ-1234`                                                                                                        |
| CZ_JIRA_APPEND       | jiraAppend     | ""                | Appends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `DAZ-1234]`                                                                                                         |

## Dynamic Configuration

Alternatively, if you want to create your own profile, you can use the _configurable_ approach.
Here is an example:
**./index.js**
```javascript
const custom = require('@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira/configurable');
// You can do this optionally if you want to extend the commit types
const defaultTypes = require('@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira/types');

module.exports = custom({
  types: {
    ...defaultTypes,
    perf: {
      description: 'Improvements that will make your code perform better',
      title: 'Performance'
    }
  },
  skipScope: false,
  scopes: ['myScope1', 'myScope2']
});
```
**./package.json**
```json
{
  "config": {
    "commitizen": {
      "path": "./index.js"
    }
  }
}
```

This example would:
* Display _"perf"_ as an extra commit type
* Ask you to add a commit scope
* Limit the scope selection to either `myScope` or `myScope2`

List of all supported configurable options when using the _configurable_ approach:
| Key            | Default                  | Description                                                                                                                                                           |
| -------------- | ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| jiraMode       | true                     | If this is set to true, CZ will ask for a Jira issue and put it in the commit head. If set to false CZ will ask for the issue in the end, and can be used for GitHub. |
| maxHeaderWidth | 72                       | This limits how long a commit message head can be.                                                                                                                    |
| minHeaderWidth | 2                        | This limits how short a commit message can be.                                                                                                                        |
| maxLineWidth   | 100                      | Commit message bodies are automatically wrapped. This decides how long the lines will be.                                                                             |
| skipScope      | true                     | If scope should be used in commit messages.                                                                                                                           |
| defaultType    | undefined                | The default type.                                                                                                                                                     |
| defaultScope   | undefined                | The default scope.                                                                                                                                                    |
| defaultSubject | undefined                | A default subject.                                                                                                                                                    |
| defaultBody    | undefined                | A default body.                                                                                                                                                       |
| defaultIssues  | undefined                | A default issue.                                                                                                                                                      |
| jiraPrefix     | 'DAZ'                    | The default JIRA ticket prefix that will be displayed.                                                                                                                |
| types          | ./types.js               | A list (JS Object) of supported commit types.                                                                                                                         |
| scopes         | undefined                | A list (JS Array) of scopes that will be available for selection. Note that adding this will change the scope field from Inquirer 'input' to 'list'.                  |
| jiraOptional   | false                    | If this is set to true, you can leave the JIRA field blank.                                                                                                           |
| jiraLocation   | "pre-description"        | Changes position of JIRA ID. Options: `pre-type`, `pre-description`, `post-description`                                                                               |
| jiraPrepend    | ""                       | Prepends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `[DAZ-1234`                                                                                                        |
| jiraAppend     | ""                       | Appends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `DAZ-1234]`                                                                                                         |
### Commitlint

If using the [commitlint](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/commitlint) js library, the "maxHeaderWidth" configuration property will default to the configuration of the "header-max-length" rule instead of the hard coded value of 72. This can be ovewritten by setting the 'maxHeaderWidth' configuration in package.json or the CZ_MAX_HEADER_WIDTH environment variable.

Commit message:

feat: adds optional exclamation mark after scope (#46)
for breaking changes
must be activated via configuration option "exclamationMark"

README.md, after:

# cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira

Part of the [commitizen](https://github.com/commitizen/cz-cli) family. Prompts for [conventional changelog](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/conventional-changelog) standard and also prompts for a mandatory JIRA issue.

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira.svg?style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira.svg?style=flat-square)](http://npm-stat.com/charts.html?package=@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira&from=2015-08-01)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira.svg?style=flat-square)](https://travis-ci.org/digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira)

## Features

- Works seamlessly with semantic-release 🚀
- Works seamlessly with Jira smart commits
- Automatically detects the Jira issue from the branch name

## Quickstart

### Installation

```bash
npm install commitizen @digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira
```

and then add the following to package.json:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "commit": "git-cz"
  },
  "config": {
    "commitizen": {
      "path": "./node_modules/@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira"
    }
  }
}
```

### Usage

![Gif of terminal when using cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira/master/images/demo.gif)

## Configuration

Like commitizen, you can specify the configuration of cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira through the package.json's `config.commitizen` key, or with environment variables.

| Environment variable | package.json   | Default           | Description                                                                                                                                                           |
| -------------------- | -------------- | ----------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CZ_JIRA_MODE         | jiraMode       | true              | If this is set to true, CZ will ask for a Jira issue and put it in the commit head. If set to false CZ will ask for the issue in the end, and can be used for GitHub. |
| CZ_MAX_HEADER_WIDTH  | maxHeaderWidth | 72                | This limits how long a commit message head can be.                                                                                                                    |
| CZ_MIN_HEADER_WIDTH  | minHeaderWidth | 2                 | This limits how short a commit message can be.                                                                                                                        |
| CZ_MAX_LINE_WIDTH    | maxLineWidth   | 100               | Commit message bodies are automatically wrapped. This decides how long the lines will be.                                                                             |
| CZ_SKIP_SCOPE        | skipScope      | true              | If scope should be used in commit messages.                                                                                                                           |
|                      | scopes         | undefined         | A list (JS Array) of scopes that will be available for selection. Note that adding this will change the scope field from Inquirer 'input' to 'list'.                  |
| CZ_TYPE              | defaultType    | undefined         | The default type.                                                                                                                                                     |
| CZ_SCOPE             | defaultScope   | undefined         | The default scope.                                                                                                                                                    |
| CZ_SUBJECT           | defaultSubject | undefined         | A default subject.                                                                                                                                                    |
| CZ_BODY              | defaultBody    | undefined         | A default body.                                                                                                                                                       |
| CZ_ISSUES            | defaultIssues  | undefined         | A default issue.                                                                                                                                                      |
| CZ_JIRA_OPTIONAL     | jiraOptional   | false             | If this is set to true, you can leave the JIRA field blank.                                                                                                           |
| CZ_JIRA_PREFIX       | jiraPrefix     | "DAZ"             | If this is set it will be will be displayed as the default JIRA ticket prefix                                                                                         |
| CZ_JIRA_LOCATION     | jiraLocation   | "pre-description" | Changes position of JIRA ID. Options: `pre-type`, `pre-description`, `post-description`                                                                               |
| CZ_JIRA_PREPEND      | jiraPrepend    | ""                | Prepends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `[DAZ-1234`                                                                                                        |
| CZ_JIRA_APPEND       | jiraAppend     | ""                | Appends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `DAZ-1234]`                                                                                                         |
| CZ_EXCLAMATION_MARK  | exclamationMark| false             | On breaking changes, adds an exclamation mark (!) after the scope, e.g.: `type(scope)!: break stuff`. When activated, reduces the effective allowed header length by 1.  |

## Dynamic Configuration

Alternatively, if you want to create your own profile, you can use the _configurable_ approach.
Here is an example:
**./index.js**
```javascript
const custom = require('@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira/configurable');
// You can do this optionally if you want to extend the commit types
const defaultTypes = require('@digitalroute/cz-conventional-changelog-for-jira/types');

module.exports = custom({
  types: {
    ...defaultTypes,
    perf: {
      description: 'Improvements that will make your code perform better',
      title: 'Performance'
    }
  },
  skipScope: false,
  scopes: ['myScope1', 'myScope2']
});
```
**./package.json**
```json
{
  "config": {
    "commitizen": {
      "path": "./index.js"
    }
  }
}
```

This example would:
* Display _"perf"_ as an extra commit type
* Ask you to add a commit scope
* Limit the scope selection to either `myScope` or `myScope2`

List of all supported configurable options when using the _configurable_ approach:
| Key            | Default                  | Description                                                                                                                                                           |
| -------------- | ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| jiraMode       | true                     | If this is set to true, CZ will ask for a Jira issue and put it in the commit head. If set to false CZ will ask for the issue in the end, and can be used for GitHub. |
| maxHeaderWidth | 72                       | This limits how long a commit message head can be.                                                                                                                    |
| minHeaderWidth | 2                        | This limits how short a commit message can be.                                                                                                                        |
| maxLineWidth   | 100                      | Commit message bodies are automatically wrapped. This decides how long the lines will be.                                                                             |
| skipScope      | true                     | If scope should be used in commit messages.                                                                                                                           |
| defaultType    | undefined                | The default type.                                                                                                                                                     |
| defaultScope   | undefined                | The default scope.                                                                                                                                                    |
| defaultSubject | undefined                | A default subject.                                                                                                                                                    |
| defaultBody    | undefined                | A default body.                                                                                                                                                       |
| defaultIssues  | undefined                | A default issue.                                                                                                                                                      |
| jiraPrefix     | 'DAZ'                    | The default JIRA ticket prefix that will be displayed.                                                                                                                |
| types          | ./types.js               | A list (JS Object) of supported commit types.                                                                                                                         |
| scopes         | undefined                | A list (JS Array) of scopes that will be available for selection. Note that adding this will change the scope field from Inquirer 'input' to 'list'.                  |
| jiraOptional   | false                    | If this is set to true, you can leave the JIRA field blank.                                                                                                           |
| jiraLocation   | "pre-description"        | Changes position of JIRA ID. Options: `pre-type`, `pre-description`, `post-description`                                                                               |
| jiraPrepend    | ""                       | Prepends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `[DAZ-1234`                                                                                                        |
| jiraAppend     | ""                       | Appends JIRA ID with an optional decorator. e.g.: `DAZ-1234]`                                                                                                         |
| exclamationMark| false                    | On breaking changes, adds an exclamation mark (!) after the scope, e.g.: `type(scope)!: break stuff`. When activated, reduces the effective allowed header length by 1.  |


### Commitlint

If using the [commitlint](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/commitlint) js library, the "maxHeaderWidth" configuration property will default to the configuration of the "header-max-length" rule instead of the hard coded value of 72. This can be ovewritten by setting the 'maxHeaderWidth' configuration in package.json or the CZ_MAX_HEADER_WIDTH environment variable.
